B one metastases occur in up to 90% of men with advanced prostate cancer compared with significantly lower rates of skeletal metastases from other common cancers such as lung and colon.
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is the most potent circulating androgen and is synthesized from T by peripheral tissues, with an affinity for the androgen receptor (AR) two to three times greater than T.
For primary calvarial osteoblast cultures, calvariae were harvested from 4-day-old ICR Swiss mouse pups, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and then placed in PBS (2 mL per mouse litter) containing 0.1% collagenase (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) and 0.2% dispase (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany). Calvariae were agitated at 37 C for 7 minutes to release cells. The first extraction was discarded, and the process was repeated three times. Osteoblasts collected in the last three extractions were combined. Cells were plated at a density of 10 6 cells per 3.8 cm 2 in αMEM, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.
Murine long bone osteoblasts were harvested using a modified protocol as previously described.
FBS that had been charcoal-stripped, a method to remove steroids, was used to culture osteoblasts during experimentation. Briefly, FBS was charcoal-stripped using a dextran-coated charcoal protocol.
Cells were thawed and plated in a six-well plate in αMEM with 10% FBS containing 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. The next day, half of the wells' media were treated with differentiation media containing osteoblast media with 10 mM beta-glycerol phosphate and 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid. Media from all wells were replaced every 3 days for 28 days. On the 28th day, the cells were washed carefully with PBS three times, fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 30 minutes, washed with distilled water twice, and stained with fresh 2% alizarin red (pH 4.2 with 10% ammonium hydroxide) for 5 to 10 minutes. The cells were carefully washed with copious amounts of water until no stain was observed in the wash.
Murine calvarial osteoblasts from 4-day-old ICR Swiss pups were harvested. These cells were plated in triplicate in six-well plates and grown to confluence. The cells were washed with PBS and frozen at À80 C. The RNA was isolated using a Zymo RNA MiniPrep Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA). RNA integrity was evaluated using 0.1% bleach in a 1% agarose gel. RNA-Seq libraries were generated using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA prep kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and paired-end sequenced on a NextSeq 500/550 (Illumina) using an Illumina Nextseq High Output 150 cycle v2 cartridge. The reads were aligned to the GRCm38 genome assembly with hierarchical indexing for spliced alignment of transcripts (HISAT2),
Long-bone osteoblasts were cultured to confluence and RNA harvested using a Zymo RNA MiniPrep Kit (Zymo Research). Messenger RNA expression was determined by real-time RT-PCR using an iScript SYBR Green RT-PCR kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and a MyIQ Single-Color Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). PCR primers are reported in the Supplemental Table
The prostate cancer cell lines C4-2B, LNCaP, and 22Rv1 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). The C4-2B and 22Rv1 cell lines were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 2 mM L-glutamine growth medium supplemented with 10% FBS. The LNCaP cell line was cultured in the same media as above but with the addition of 1 mM sodium pyruvate. The ARCaP M prostate cell line was obtained from Novicure Biotechnology (Birmingham, AL, USA) and cultured in MCaP media (Novicure Biotechnology) supplemented with 5% FBS. All cell lines were also cultured with 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 μl/mL streptomycin at 37 C containing 5% CO 2 . DHEA was obtained from Steraloids (Newport, RI, USA); R1881 was obtained from PerkinElmer (Waltham, MA, USA); and enzalutamide was obtained from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX, USA). During experimentation, charcoalstripped FBS was used.
Tandem mass spectrometry with two-dimensional liquid chromatography (LC-MS/MS) Unlabeled and deuterium-labeled steroid standards were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), Cerilliant (Round Rock, TX, USA), C/D/N Isotopes (Pointe-Claire, Canada), and Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury, MA, USA). A 20-μL aliquot of conditioned medium was diluted with 80 μL deionized water, mixed with internal standards, and extracted with 0.7 mL methyl-tertbutyl ether using Isolute cartridges (Biotage, Charlotte, NC, USA) as described.
The lentivirus pBM14-tat3-g.luc-VSVG (tat3-GLuc) construct was a gift from the Dr William Rainey.
the 1X lentivirus overnight. The next morning, cultures were replaced with fresh medium and allowed to recover for 24 hours before plating into experimental dishes.
Cells transduced with the tat3-Gluc/DsRed lentivirus combination were plated into 24-well black-walled, glass-bottom plates at 50% confluence. The cells were treated in quadruplicate. When conditioned media were collected, DsRed fluorescence was determined from each well using a BioTek Synergy HTX plate reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA), with the values used to normalize GLuc values. Conditioned media were collected and tested for GLuc activity using the GLuc substrate coelenterazine (Prolume, Pinetop, AZ, USA). A 12-mM coelenterazine master stock was made with acidified methanol and stored at -80 C. The master stock was diluted in PBS containing 5 mM sodium chloride to make a 30 μM working stock. Fifty microliters were injected into the wells of a solid white 96-well plate containing 20 μL of collected media from the transduced experimental cells. After a 2-second shaking, luminescence signal was integrated for 10 seconds and measured on a BioTek Synergy HTX plate reader (BioTek).
Cells were plated into 24-well black-walled, glass-bottom plates at 50% confluence. The cells were treated as with previous experiments in quadruplicate. PSA concentration of conditioned media was determined using human kallikrein 3/PSA Quantikine ELISA Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) on days 2 and 3 after the treatment. When conditioned media were collected, cell number was determined from each well using a BioTek Lionheart FX automated microscope (BioTek) with the cell numbers, as measured by DsRed fluorescence, used to normalize PSA values.
Prostate cancer cells with constitutive DsRed expression were plated into 24-well black-walled, glass-bottom plates at 10% confluence. The cells were treated as with previous experiments in quadruplicate with treatments replenished at day 3. At days 0, 3, and 6, each well was imaged using a BioTek Lionheart FX automated microscope (BioTek) with a 4x/0.13NA objective (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and an RFP filter cube (531 nm/593 nm) paired with a 523 nm high-power LED. The images were analyzed for confluency using the Gen5 Image Prime software package (BioTek).
Single-variable data sets containing two groups were analyzed by a t test. Single-variable data sets containing three or more groups were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Data sets containing two independent variables were analyzed by two-way ANOVA using Dunnett's, Sidak's, or Tukey's multiple comparison testing. Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 9 Software (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). An α-cut-off value of 0.05 was used for all analyses and reported p values were applied to two-tailed analyses.
To test the hypothesis that osteoblasts metabolize DHEA into active androgens, we first assessed the expression of the required enzymes for these conversions. The expression of each of these enzymes was determined using three complementary methods-RNA-Seq of cultured murine calvarial osteoblasts (Fig.
The expression of Cyp19a1, the gene that encodes aromatase that generates estradiol from T and estrone from androstenedione, was not detected in murine calvarial osteoblasts via RNA-Seq or long-bone osteoblasts via real-time RT-PCR expression analyses (data not shown). Human CYP19A1 message was reported present in the iliac crest bone biopsy samples but in a very low amount with a mean gene count of 29.8 (SD ± 14.0). Gene counts of less than 10 were reported as being nonexpressed.
Murine osteoblasts harvested from the epiphyseal region of long bones were selected for study (Supplemental Fig.
Neither estradiol nor estrone was detected in DHEA-treated osteoblast conditioned media by LC-MS/MS. The lower limit of detection of these estrogens in this sensitive assay is 4.9 pg/mL and is consistent with negligible Cyp19a1 expression in murine osteoblasts.
The prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP and C4-2B are androgen sensitive.
LNCaP and C4-2B cells demonstrated active 3βHSD activity with robust conversion of DHEA to androstenedione. Less
The capacity for osteoblast-generated T to activate AR signaling in prostate cancer cells was next tested. Since the androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells also synthesize androgens from DHEA, the contributions of each cell type to generate androgens were determined. Residual T already present in osteoblast conditioned media (CM) would immediately activate prostate cancer AR signaling, whereas DHEA must first be converted to T or DHT in prostate cancer cells before AR signaling would commence.
The prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP and C4-2B were transduced with a lentivirus AR-reporter construct (tat3-GLuc) containing three AREs fused to a basal promoter and Gaussia luciferase (GLuc).
Enzalutamide is an effective and specific androgen antagonist that blocks three AR activation steps: androgen binding to AR, translocation of the androgen-AR complex to the nucleus, and the assocation of the androgen-AR complex to AREs.
The ability of osteoblast-generated androgens to stimulate PSA production by LNCaP and C4-2B cells was tested. The prostate cancer cells were transduced with the DsRed lentivirus to monitor cell number and treated with 100 nM DHEA CM or 100 nM DHEA, 1 μM DHEA CM, or 1 μM DHEA, and compared with EtOH CM and an ethanol vehicle control. Media were collected at 48 and 72 hours. LNCaP (Fig.
Prostate cancer cell growth also responded to osteoblastgenerated androgens. Prostate cancer cells were transduced with the DsRed lentivirus and treated with 100 nM DHEA CM or 100 nM DHEA, 1 μM DHEA CM or 1 μM DHEA, and compared with EtOH CM and an ethanol vehicle control. DsRed fluorescence, as a marker of cell number, was measured by fluorescence microscopy and reported as percent culture confluence after 3 and 6 days of culture. Treatment with 100 nM DHEA CM and 1 μM DHEA CM compared with EtOH CM increased cell number in LNCaP (Fig.
The concentration of T generated by conversion of the lowest DHEA concentration in osteoblasts would be expected to activate androgen signaling, as the equilibrium dissociation constant of the AR for T is $0.2 nM (58 pg/mL).
A novel and unreported discovery that the osteoblast generates androgens from the adrenal steroid precursor DHEA is now reported. This finding represents another example that the skeleton is a true hormone-producing organ. It remains unclear the extent to which the skeleton contributes to circulating androgens, but the concentration of testosterone generated is sufficient to activate AR signaling locally. Osteoblasts may therefore represent an essential source of androgens to fuel prostate cancer bone metastases, complementing or fulfilling androgen production when intratumoral androgen generation by prostate cancer cells may be limited or absent. The affinity of prostate cancer cells to the skeleton is a phenomenon that is unique compared with many other types of cancer. The bone microenvironment creating a rich source of androgens is a plausible explanation for prostate cancer's affinity toward invasion and growth in the skeleton.
The intratumoral generation of androgens is an important mechanism of CRPC progression.
To investigate how osteoblast-generated androgens contribute to prostate cancer AR signaling and growth, a strategy was selected in which CM from osteoblasts after DHEA treatment was compared with the direct treatment of DHEA. Since osteoblasts did not completely metabolize all DHEA, and androstenediol and androstenedione intermediates were also present in the CM, these substrates likely contributed to the intratumoral generation of androgens by prostate cancer cells. However, since enzymatic conversion of these substrates by the prostate cancer cells takes time, the greater increase in AR signaling with the CM at the earlier time points is due to osteoblast-generated testosterone.
Although osteoblast-generated androgens, as reported here, likely contribute to prostate cancer expansion in bone, other mechanisms of prostate cancer regulation by osteoblasts have been reported. In one report, co-culture with the pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3 accentuated the DHT-regulated increase in MDA-PCa-2b prostate cancer cell numbers.
An unexpected finding is that only a single 3βHSD enzyme isoform was expressed in mouse osteoblasts and human bone. The 3βHSD7 enzyme may, therefore, serve as a unique drug target to block osteoblast androgen production and prostate cancer bone metastasis in CRPC. Targeting this isoenzyme, which has more tissue-selective expression, would be expected to have fewer adverse effects than targeting other proteins, such as AR, which has more global expression. Mice engineered for Hsd3b7 inactivation die of hepatic failure due to the participation of 3βHSD7 in hepatic bile acid synthesis. However, most of these mice, when maintained on vitamin and bile acid supplements, had a normal life span.
During the initial invasion of prostate cancer cells to bone, the osteoblast may be the principal source of androgens. This hypothesis has not been directly tested because clinical trials have not been designed to address this question. The pivotal clinical trials evaluating the androgen synthesis inhibitor abiraterone acetate and the androgen receptor antagonist enzalutamide reported an increase in overall survival and clinical progression-free survival when combined with ADT and compared with ADT alone in patients with metastatic prostate cancer, most of whom had bone metastasis.
