Sunscreens are widely employed to protect human skin from sunburn and the long-term consequences of exposure to the sun. The suitability of a given sunscreen molecule depends on a range of factors, but its effectiveness will clearly be limited if it behaves as a photosensitizer.
In this paper, we adopt a new approach to better understand the photodegradation pathways and hence photosensitization mechanisms that are available to PBSA through applying the novel technique of laser-interfaced photodissociation mass spectrometry.
Here, we employ electrospray ionization to transfer [PBSA-H] -from solution into the gas phase where the ion is then mass selected and interrogated with laser photons over a wide UV range. This allows us to monitor how the absorbance of the anion varies with wavelength, while simultaneously measuring the production of any photoproducts.
The gaseous ion absorption (photodepletion) and photofragment production spectra of [PBSA-H] -, were recorded in vacuo using action spectroscopy. An AmaZon SL mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) modified for laser-interfaced mass spectrometry (LIMS), was used as described previously.
[PBSA-H] -was mass selected (m/z 273) and isolated in the ion trap prior to laser irradiation.
Photons were produced by an Nd:YAG pumped OPO laser (Surelite™/Horizon™, Amplitude Laser Group, San Jose, CA, USA), giving 0.3 ± 10% mJ across the range 500-216 nm (2.48-5.74 eV), with 2 nm laser step sizes. Photofragmentation experiments were conducted with an ion accumulation time of 10 ms. To minimize the possibility of multiphoton events via sequential absorption, each mass-selected ion packet interacts with only one laser pulse In these expressions, IntOFF and IntON are the laser off and on parent ion peak intensities respectively; IntFRAG is the fragment intensity with the laser on; λ is the excitation wavelength (nm); P is the laser pulse energy (mJ); and IntPFT is the sum of the photofragment ion intensities with the laser on. The photodepletion spectrum is considered to be equivalent to the gaseous absorption spectrum in the limit where excited state fluorescence is negligible.
Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed to investigate the ground-state thermal fragmentation characteristics of [PBSA-H] -, using an Orbitrap™ Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) as described previously.
were recorded with a UV-1800 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a 10 mm UV quartz cuvette, with deionized H2O as the baseline solvent.
All calculations were performed using Density Functional Theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31+G** level in Gaussian 09.
The sulfonic acid group is a strongly acidic group, so PBSA will be deprotonated at the H15 position (Scheme 1) in aqueous solution to form the sulfonate monoanion.
As expected, deprotonation is favored from the sulfonic acid group (O14), both in the gas phase and in acetonitrile, although the relative energies of the two deprotomers are closer in the gas phase. Boltzmann population calculations indicate that the O14 deprotomer dominates (>99.9%) in acetonitrile at 458 K. Since electrospray from acetonitrile solutions maintains the solution-phase ratios of different tautomeric species,
We next turn to exploring the photofragment ions that are associated with the excited states evident in the Figure
The key point of note about the photofragment pathways, is that two of these pathways ([2a]     and [2c]) result in the production of free-radical species.
To provide further insight into the nature of the [PBSA-H] -excited states and decay pathways, Figures
The action spectrum of the lowest mass ionic photofragment, m/z 80, is shown in Figure
It is evident from the data presented in Figures
Section S2 of the Supporting Information provides an electron detachment yield spectrum, and further details of the extent of electron detachment versus ionic fragmentation. At 224 nm, for example, electron detachment is estimated to constitute 85% of photodepletion compared to 15% branching into ionic fragments. Despite the strong propensity for electron detachment in the gas-phase, it is well established that the propensity of an anionic molecule to photodetach will be quenched upon solvation,
To act as an efficient sunscreen, a molecule must be able to convert the harmful UV radiation it has absorbed into benign thermal energy. This is achieved by the electronic excited state(s) being able to rapidly relax back to the electronic ground state from where excess energy is dissipated by heat loss.
The relative ion yield plots shown in Figure
The ion-yield plots displayed in Figure
The most detailed solution-phase study of PBSA photochemistry and photophysics conducted to date was that of Inbaraj et al.
It is important at this point to consider how our gas-phase results relate to the photochemistry of PBSA in solution. In Section 2.2, we noted that the region I absorption blue-shifts upon solvation. It is reasonable to assume that the photochemistry we observe across region I in the gas-phase (3.4-4.2 eV), similarly blue-shifts in solution to the 3.8-4.6 eV range. Zhang et al.
has calculated the solution-phase S1 excitation energy of [PBSA-H] -as 4.045 eV,
In summary, we report for the first time the gaseous electronic photoabsorption spectrum and direct photofragment production profile spectra of the native form of PBSA, a popular FDAapproved UV filter found within many existing commercial sunscreens. The novelty of our gas-phase experiment is that it allows us to map the direct laser-induced photodegradation products of [PBSA-H] -, away from the complications of bulk mixtures where secondary photoproducts can dominate. Strikingly, we observe evidence for high-yield production of free-radical species at photon energies between 3.5-5. in the triplet state is known to aid in the breakdown of such states into such free radical pairs.
[b] VDE = E (neutral at optimized anion geometry) -E (anion). This is included in the table
for comparison with the experimental spectra. Observed in HCD
[a] Determined with mass accuracy > 0.3 amu.
[b] Very strong (vs), strong (s), medium (m), weak (w), and very weak (vw).            The ln-ln of the data has been plotted and overlain with a pseudolinear fit. The resultant slope is proportional to the number of absorbed photons.
