High-sensitivity, high-throughput protein analysis (i.e., proteomics) is essential in the postgenome world to complement advances in DNA and RNA sequencing and genetic engineering.
Great strides have been made in identifying proteins from complex mixtures, supported by two decades of developments in mass spectrometry (MS) and ultra-small-scale high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). These achievements in protein identification rely on the free availability of stockpiled nucleic acid sequences from a multitude of organisms. Beyond DNA, RNA, and protein sequence, lies an invaluable fourth dimension of information regarding the architecture of life: protein processing and modification. That fourth dimension is important because modifications to thousands of component proteins in a cell may change with the cell cycle, environmental conditions, developmental stage, and metabolic state. Markers reflecting health, environmental exposure, and disease can be encoded in this fourth dimension of information. Modifications can alter protein localization, activity, lifetime, and how that protein interacts with other molecules. Modifications are not necessarily homogeneously distributed in a protein population, making the discovery and quantification of each modification an almost insurmountable task and one that depends on many factors including protein concentration and dynamic range of the sample under investigation
For complex mixtures, we classify experimental approaches that sort (separate) intact proteins prior to analysis as 'top-down' proteomics and approaches that cleave proteins within a complex mixture, prior to analysis, as 'bottom-up' proteomics. We shall apply 'top-down' MS and 'bottom-up' MS to describe the nature of the analyte introduced to the mass spectrometer.
Hence, the reversed phase HPLC delivery of intact proteins from a ribosome mixture to a mass spectrometer for mass analysis, precursor ion selection, electron capture dissociation (ECD), and analysis of the product ions (MS/MS) would constitute top-down proteomics and top-down MS, but collecting HPLC fractions from the ribosomal preparation and subjecting each fraction (isolated protein) to trypsin digestion followed by liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) of the peptides would, in our usage, constitute top-down proteomics and bottom-up MS.
Bottom-up proteomics integrates the cleaved products detected from all protein forms (proteoforms
Top-down proteomics, particularly when pursued with polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)-based platforms, can complement the bottom-up proteomic approaches for addressing the problems described above. By revealing the minimum number of proteoforms present in a sample, and separating many distinct forms for individual analyses, an analyst is better able to differentiate splice variants that are present from those that are not present and to quickly estimate the number of distinct species present. Error-tolerant searches can be more sensitive than in bottom-up proteomics, because they must query only a small number of candidate proteins. Top-down proteomic methods can expose large deviations from predictions, e.g., migration in the SDS-PAGE size dimension inconsistent with a given molecular weight, focusing far from the predicted isoelectric point (pI), or non-binding of appropriate antibodies.
Deviant products can be flagged for additional analyses likely to yield new discoveries, while products found to be consistent with predictions (e.g., molecular masses matching theoretical) can be considered characterized. The ability to quantitatively track one or more proteoforms (by staining intensity or autoradiography) from multiple samples and to excise these proteoforms for chemical analysis (e.g., protein identification or carbohydrate composition) is a strength of topdown proteomics.
Top-down proteomics/top-down mass spectrometry has been very successfully pursued by combining Gel Elution Liquid-based Fractionation Entrapment Electrophoresis (GELFrEE) fractionation, protein precipitation, and reversed phase HPLC with electrospray ionization (ESI) and MS/MS
Our interest lies in linking accurate molecular masses to denaturing isoelectric focusing (IEF) and to two-dimensional (2D)-PAGE analyses (of which IEF constitutes the first dimension).
With the advent of immobilized pH gradient (IPG) gels, IEF offers the highest resolution available in the proteomics toolbox, capable of separating protein isoforms whose isoelectric points differ by only 0.001 pH units
In the 'virtual 2D gel' MS platform
It enables researchers to triage which spots of interest contain proteins in expected forms (no additional characterization effort needed) and which differ (with the mass perhaps suggesting possibilities for those differences; e.g., +42 Da suggests an acetylation or trimethylation).
Protein-level quantitation, provided by staining or radiography via classical 2D gels, provides a useful complement to any peptide-level quantitation available from in-gel digests or bottom-up proteomics.
The early work that developed the concept of the virtual 2D gel/MS platform was performed using MALDI-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) instruments utilizing 20Hz-UV lasers for desorption/ionization. Today's availability of high-speed MALDI-TOF MSI instruments equipped with kHz-repetition rate lasers along with improvements in preparing matrix-embedded dry gels (xerogels) pave the way for the virtual 2D gel/MS platform to become easier to implement. Methods for establishing this platform are discussed in this article.
Sample preparation for IEF
Following incubation, 1200 L of lysis buffer, 138 mg urea, and 50 mg thiourea were added to the solutions and the mixtures were vortexed extensively. The lysis buffer contained 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM DTT, 1.54% Pharmalyte™ 3-10 carrier ampholytes (v/v; GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ), and 2.55% CHAPS (w/v). Protein extract concentrations, assessed with the NI™ (Non-Interfering™) Protein Assay (G-Biosciences), were typically 1-5 mg/mL. Extracts were aliquoted for storage at -80 o C.
Isoelectric focusing employed precast IPG strips (ReadyStrip™, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA or Immobiline™ DryStrip, GE Healthcare) spanning pH 4-7 or 3-10 in 18 cm. Samples
Following IEF, polyacrylamide gels were stored at -80 o C, until processed for direct MS, wholegel trypsin digestion, or SDS-PAGE second dimension electrophoresis.
Focused IPG gels were removed from the freezer and allowed to rest for a few minutes at room temperature. Once thawed, the gels were removed from the storage container with tweezers and placed gel side up on damp paper towels. Excess mineral oil (remaining from the IEF) was drained off the gels by lifting an edge of the polyester Mylar backing with tweezers. Each gel surface was blotted once, gently, with a damp paper towel. Scissor cuts were made at the edges of each gel support/backing to provide unique identifiers. Gel strips were incubated for 15 minutes in a glass tray containing 200 mL of wash solution (49.9% H 2 O /50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)), mixing slowly on a lab rocker. The large volume of liquid removes or reduces the amounts of several substances essential to high-resolution electrophoresis but detrimental to MALDI MS: detergents, urea, thiourea, ampholytes, and residual mineral oil
Each filter paper-blotted gel was placed, gel side up, in an individual plastic tray (220 mm x 15 mm x 5 mm, length x width x depth) atop a laboratory rotating platform. About 13-15 mL of 1:3 matrix was dispensed to each tray and gel incubation proceeded for 10 minutes, mixing at low speed. With tweezers, gels were removed from the matrix solutions and transferred to empty trays, covered, and left overnight (12 hours or greater) at room temperature.
The next day, the dry, matrix-treated gels were placed in clean trays atop the rotating platform and ~15 mL of the 1:2 matrix solution was dispensed. Gels incubated in the solutions for 10 minutes, rotating at low speed, after which the gels were removed from the solutions with tweezers and transferred to empty trays, covered to prevent dust from settling on them, and left overnight for the matrix to crystallize and the gels to dry thoroughly.
Whole gel trypsin digestions were performed employing protocols described previously
Dry IEF strips were cut into two 9cm-long pieces and secured to the sample stage with electrically conductive, double-sided transfer tape (Adhesives Research, Glen Rock, PA), cognizant of anode/cathode orientation (Figure
Mass spectra were acquired with UV irradiation on Bruker Daltonics AutoFlex™ Speed and Ultraflex™ MALDI time-of-flight mass spectrometers with accompanying software (e.g., FlexControl™, FlexImaging™ and FlexAnalysis™). Gels were imaged by acquiring data at raster sizes of 200-600µm.
In previous efforts
Glycerol is a well-known stabilizer for polyacrylamide gels, minimizing their shrinkage and curling during drying, but high concentrations also degrade MALDI MS. We explored glycerol addition from 1-10% v/v, but found that amounts sufficient to maintain xerogel adherence to the Mylar backing rendered the matrix crystallization unreliable. Next, we considered saccharide additives, because they are known plasticizers and their presence in analyte solutions is often innocuous, or even helpful to protein analyses. Fucose additives have some history of benefitting MALDI MS analyses
Experience preparing and analyzing matrix-deposited xerogels led us to consider what properties accounted for gels delivering good ion intensities at many spatial positions versus poorer performing gels. One property appeared to be the type and speed of matrix crystallization.
Inspections of many crystallized gels yielding good and poor ion intensities for ≥ 20 kDa proteins suggested that clear, 'chopstick'-shaped crystals obtained by slow crystallization seemed to have a higher success rate, and that employing ACN:H 2 O solvent ratios below 1:1 (v/v) provided some advantage, although matrix crystallization is notoriously hard to control. Gel incubation in 1:3 ACN:H 2 O, was more likely to deliver the desired crystal form than 1:2, but crystals from the former were typically deposited sparsely (or not at all) across the gel. These observations led to the double matrix incubation described in the Methods section. Microcrystals from a first incubation in the 1:3 matrix solution (with lower sinapinic acid solubility) serve as seeds for the second crystallization from the 1:2 solution.
An optical image of a sinapinic acid-treated gel segment spanning ~1 pH unit, a spectral image generated by averaging individual mass spectra acquired across that pH span, and spectra acquired at discrete isoelectric points are illustrated in Figure
Electrostatic spray ionization (ESTASI), an ambient ionization method
Available high repetition rate lasers and automation packages designed for MSI simplify and speed up data acquisition compared to our previous efforts in imaging IEF gels
It is clear from Fig.
Previous ESTASI analyses from IPG strips loaded with a mixture of 4 µg of myoglobin, 4 µg of cytochrome c, and 400 µg of Escherichia coli soluble proteins revealed multiply charged ions for myoglobin and cytochrome c at their migration positions, with charge state envelopes suitable for calculating their molecular mass. For the loaded E. coli proteins, however, it was not clear if molecular weights could be determined from the 3 spectra presented, but ion signals were observed. This comparison suggests that, at present, MALDI interrogation of IPG-IEF gels may be more sensitive than ESTASI.
Trypsin digestions of IEF-separated proteins (reduced and alkylated in gel after focusing) can be performed gel-wide by depositing enzyme solution onto the gel surface
The proteins identified from this map were SYN0546, RSYN1909, RSYN0983, and RSYN2636 with sequence coverages of 34%, 22%, 18%, and 17% respectively. Observing these proteins together at this position on the digested IPG strip recapitulates their vertical position (pI 5.30) on the fluorescently stained 2D gel, and allows observed peptides to be correlated to proteoform intact masses, 2D gel staining intensities, and any additional information derived from excised spots.
At present, the sensitivity for analyzing peptides from these whole-gel digests trails that from ingel digestion of excised bands by about two orders of magnitude. Nevertheless, detected peptides can be subjected to further analysis by MS/MS, as shown in the Fig.
Another example of useful information accessible to virtual 2D gel electrophoresis is its elucidation of protein heterogeneity as illustrated in Figure
Gel-free, bottom-up proteomics is exquisitely powerful, but the information that it provides often stands alone, because most biological studies examine proteins rather than peptides. Certainly much can be inferred about proteins from their peptides, but direct protein analyses provide a means to check those inferences, and can alert us to unexpected mass discrepancies (that can lead to new discoveries). Developments in faster data acquisition and gel preparation presented here should make virtual 2D gel electrophoresis better able to complement previous, current, and future proteomic studies of the same or similar samples, by matching accurate protein masses to all of the other accumulated information on 2D-PAGE-separated proteins. This MALDI MS approach remains one of the most sensitive means to obtain intact masses for proteins embedded in polyacrylamide.

Conclusions:
Gel-free, bottom-up proteomics is exquisitely powerful, but the information that it provides often stands alone, because most biological studies examine proteins rather than peptides. Certainly much can be inferred about proteins from their peptides, but direct protein analyses provide a means to check those inferences, and can alert us to unexpected mass discrepancies (that can lead to new discoveries). Developments in faster data acquisition and gel preparation presented here should make virtual 2D gel electrophoresis better able to complement previous, current, and future proteomic studies of the same or similar samples, by matching accurate protein masses to all of the other accumulated information on 2D-PAGE-separated proteins. This MALDI MS approach remains one of the most sensitive means to obtain intact masses for proteins embedded in polyacrylamide.
Support from the
Support from the
