This paper is dedicated to Prof. Heinz Falk on the occasion of his 80th birthday. He has not only been one of the most influential teachers I had, but we also share a common hobby: minerals. So, what could be more suitable than a paper on the combination of chemistry and minerals?
Garnets are a super group of minerals with the common formula M(II) 3 M(III) 2 [SiO 4 ] 3 , where M(II) are bivalent metals and M(III) are trivalent metals. They are further divided into ugrandites and pyralspites. Ugrandites have calcium in the M(II) position and either chromium (uwarowite), aluminum (grossular), or iron (andradite) in the M(III) position and pyralyspites all have aluminum in their M(III) position and magnesium (pyrope), iron (almandine), or manganese (spessartine) in the M(II) position. Additionally, garnets can form all kinds of solid mixtures and thus are often hard to classify
In this paper we will focus on the species andradite, which when of green color is called demantoid (Fig.
Another factor that influences the price of gemstones is their provenance. While two gems might look similar in terms of color, cut, and clarity, their price can differ by several hundred percent if one can be assigned to a specific mine or at least a country, the best examples being sapphires from Kashmir or rubies from Mogok, Myanmar. For demantoids, it is Russian origin that increases the value. Traditionally, these provenances are assigned by gemmologists based on inclusions and experience and thus are often called expert opinions-which means that two experts might assign two different origins for one gemstone.
Demantoids were originally found in the middle of the nineteenth century in the Ural Mountains of Russia
In the 1990s a new deposit was found in Namibia in the Erongo Mountains close to Tubussis
In this paper, we will show that by using trace element analysis it is possible to differentiate between the most important countries of origin and even further in some cases between individual deposits.
To be able to differentiate Russian stones from others, it is necessary to analyze and understand their chemistry first. We were able to obtain samples from all mentioned Russian localities, from Ufaley and Karkodin heated and unheated samples were available (heating of stones from these two localities is often necessary to remove the yellow tint and improve the green color) (Fig.
In a first attempt to assign correct origins, all Russian and Namibian stones were analyzed and trends within the chemical composition traced. It could soon be seen that most of the Russian stones have concentrations of Cr and V (green chromophores) in the range of 100-10000 ppm, whereas Namibian stones rarely have those elements at all. On the other hand, Mn could be found in Namibian stones in the range of 1-2%, whereas in the Russian stones it was only present below 500 ppm. After some optimization, it was found that using the sum of V and Cr as well as the Mn/Ti ratio as criteria, a very good separation of the 42 Russian and 23 Namibian stones is possible (Fig.
Having a closer look at the Russian localities, it could be found that using the Al/Mg ratio in combination with the Mn/Ti ratio even an identification of some individual mines is possible (Fig.
The third commercially important location at the moment is Madagascar. The andradites from Antetezambato are formed in a geologically rather similar surrounding as in Namibia (skarn deposits) and also optically are more like their Namibian than their Russian counterparts. When using the Mn/Ti versus sum of Cr and V approach, the stones from Madagascar are easily separated from the ones from Namibia by their very low Mn/Ti ratio, but due to the fact that some amount of Cr and/or V can be found they show up in the proximity of some Russian material (Fig.
A very effective way to differentiate stones from Madagascar is by looking at their Al content. Namibian stones typically have way below 1000 ppm and Russian stones, although having a higher content of mostly up to 2000 ppm, with Ufaley stones being an exception with 1500-6500 ppm, are clearly lower in Al than the Madagascar samples. The Al concentration in stones from Madagascar has always been found to be higher than 11000 ppm with maximum values being around 10% (it has to be noted that such concentrations are too high to be measured with LA-icp MS and tend to have huge errors!). Table
Using LA-icp MS it is possible to determine the concentration of several elements that can be used for the determination of the origin of demantoid garnets. From the few locations where this green variety of andradite can be found, Fig.
Rough demantoid samples were collected from Tubussis (Namibia), Ufaley (Russia), Karkodin (Russia), Poldnevskoye (Russia), Bobrovka (Russia), Bashenovskoe (Russia), and Antetezambato (Madagascar). Cut stones were either cut by the author or taken from the collection of the Austrian Gemmological Society or the collection of Gerhard Brandstetter. Many of the cut stones were only labeled "Russia" with no details of the mine. A total of 42 Russian (126 points), 23 Namibian (69 points), 2 Madagascar (14 points), and 1 multicolored sample from Ufaley Russia (59 points) were analyzed.
All samples were tested with Raman and FTIR spectroscopy to ensure that they were all andradites
Infrared spectra were collected with a Thermo Scientific iN10MX FTIR microscope in reflection mode using a liquid nitrogen cooled MCT detector. Spectra were collected from 680 to 4000 cm -1 with a resolution of 8 cm -1 and 16 scans were averaged for one spectrum. Raman spectra were collected with a Thermo Scientific DXR Raman microscope using a 780 nm laser. Spectra were recorded from 55 to 3400 cm -1 and automatically summarized until a signal to noise level of 500 was achieved.
XPS measurements were performed using a Thermo Scientific Thetaprobe device, which was equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (hη = 1486.6 eV) and dual flood gun for the surface charge neutralization. The X-ray spot on the measured sample surface was 400 µm in diameter. The survey spectra were recorded using a pass energy of 200 eV and an energy step width of 1 eV.
