Protein lysine acetylation is an evolutionarily conserved reversible covalent modification. While lysine acetylation was discovered on histones more than 50 years ago it has long been known that non-histone proteins are also acetylated
It is becoming increasingly apparent that modulation of protein acetylation plays a central role during host-pathogen interactions
Pathogen infection also triggers alterations in host non-histone protein acetylation status and immunity
In this study we used mass spectrometry to quantify global changes in protein abundance and acetylation levels triggered by pathogen infection. Critically, through the application of exogenous HC-toxin and C. carbonum strains we demonstrate that the activity of plant encoded enzymes can be modulated to alter both histone and non-histone protein acetylation. Additionally, we provide the first global acetylome for maize and significantly expand the number of acetylation sites identified in plants. Acetylated proteins carry out a wide-range of functions and include numerous well-studied maize proteins. Thus, the data presented here will enable new research approaches to understand the post-translational regulation and function of both defense and non-defense related proteins.
We used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to globally identify acetylated proteins and uncover specific acetylation levels altered during pathogen infection. We profiled Hm1A mutant maize plants, which are susceptible to the fungal pathogen, C. carbonum race 1
To gain insight into the composition of the maize acetylome we examined the distribution of acetylated proteins within MapMan functional categories
We found that the third largest bin is "RNA", which contains proteins annotated to be involved in RNA splicing and transcriptional regulation (Fig.
We observed acetylation of a wide-range of "classical" maize genes (Dataset S2), which are a set of maize genes that have been intensively studied
To better understand how pathogen infection remodels the host proteome we quantified non-modified protein abundance and acetylation levels. We first verified our acetylation measurements using a commercial antibody that recognizes tetra acetylated histone 4 (H4K5/8/12/16). We found that the H4 tetra acetylation pattern quantified using mass spectrometry matched the pattern determined using western blotting (Fig.
Globally, we determined that 171 and 116 proteins increased or decreased in abundance following treatment with HC-toxin or infection by C. carbonum strains (Fig.
To gain insight into how HC-toxin induced hyperacetylation promotes C. carbonum virulence we performed Gene Ontology (GO) overrepresentation analyses. First, we examined GO categories overrepresented among the acetylated peptides that were altered in abundance following HC-toxin treatment or infection with C. carbonum strains (Dataset S3). Strikingly, there are numerous GO categories related to transcriptional regulation over-represented in the HC-toxin and Tox + treatments (Fig.
To uncover biological processes that may be responding to HC-toxin induced acetylation of transcriptional regulators we used our protein abundance data as a proxy for transcript levels. We identified GO enrichment for a number of biosynthetic processes that are specific to HC-toxin and Tox + treatments (Fig.
In this study we used global mass spectrometry-based acetylome profiling in maize to identify over 2,700 acetylation sites arising from 912 proteins following exposure to HC toxin, a naturally occurring HDACi. These acetylated proteins represent a wide-range of functional categories suggesting that this post-translational modification can regulate diverse biological processes. Notably, we discovered that many well-characterized maize proteins are acetylated, including proteins responsible for major commercial traits including starch and oil biosynthesis. These novel descriptions of acetylation sites enable new approaches to study the potential regulation of well-characterized proteins and agronomically important traits.
Pathogen infection has been shown to induce non-histone protein acetylation and to alter host immunity
We observed that proteins associated with transcriptional regulation are hyperacetylated specifically in response to HC-toxin and Tox + treatment. These transcriptional regulatory proteins are not limited to histones and include transcription factors, chromatin remodeling enzymes and chromatin modifying enzymes. The role of transcription factors in plant defense is well documented and the importance of both chromatin remodeling and modifying enzymes is now recognized
Finally, by measuring protein abundance levels we determined that treatment with either HC-toxin or Tox + C. carbonum results in increased abundance of metabolism related proteins. We are particularly intrigued by the observed increase in proteins in the tryptophan biosynthesis pathway, which may promote susceptibility through several mechanisms. For example, an upregulation of the tryptophan biosynthesis pathway may result in increased auxin biosynthesis (Fig.
Zea mays plants in which the Hm1A (59) allele was introgressed into the B73 inbred were used for all experiments. Plants were grown in a growth chamber in a 16h light/ 8h dark photoperiod at temperatures of 28C (day) and 24C (night). Leaves 2,3 and 4 of fifteenday-old plants were sprayed mid-day till runoff with either mock (0.1% Tween-20), 100 µM HC-toxin (Sigma) or 400,000 spores/ml of HC-toxin deficient (Tox-) or HC-toxin producing (Tox+) strains of Cochlibolus carbonum race 1. Following treatment plants were bagged to increase humidity and placed back in the growth chamber for 22 hrs at which point tissue was collected and flash-frozen. Four biological replicates were used for each treatment.
Peptide preparation, and non-modified protein profiling by mass spectrometry are based on previously described methods
Data deposition: The raw spectra for the proteome data have been deposited in the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) repository (massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp) under the accession ID MSV000079681. Author contributions: JWW, ZS and SPB designed research; JWW, ZS and MRM performed research; JWW and ZS analyzed data; JWW wrote the paper.
Figure
